1. I absolutely hate that all of these arguments end up being "it only matters because God exists." It is said that you die twice. The first is when your body dies and the second is when no one remembers you. Everything you do has an impact on those that remember you. That is your legacy. I do good because when my body dies or there comes a time when I haven't spoken to someone in a very long time, I want those people to remember me kindly. Even so, I usually do good when focusing on the present. Even if my legacy is piss-poor and everyone remembers me as some cranky old asshole, it won't matter to me because I'll be dead. I try and do good in the present because it makes me feel good and I like doing it. Some might say that I'm living in denial but I'm not, I'm just limiting the scope of the argument to something realistic. Expecting my legacy to live on until the universe ceases to exist is unreasonable. I'm not that important. No one is. We barely remember people who had an important impact 70 years ago. in the present day, we are over 400 years closer to the life of Cleopatra than Cleopatra was to the building of The Great Pyramid and yet, in history lessons, we lump all of ancient Egypt together because we don't care anymore. I'm also not nihilistic. Yes, ultimately nothing matters but you're not living ultimately, you're living now and what you do now matters.
2. **Weakest:** Oddly enough, this is how I met my girlfriend. We were both at a party we were invited to at the last minute and I was chatting with people on the couch and she was sitting in the corner against a wall and looked less than thrilled to be there. I went over, introduced myself, and asked if she was okay. Like any relationship, we've had headaches and exhaustion and returned to our boring lives but if you asked either of us if it was worth it, we'd both say yes. Again, now matters because that's what we're experiencing. We're not experiencing the future and we have no active role in the future beyond our death (except, perhaps, what we leave behind in a will). I suppose that here I would be the person responding to the mopey partygoer although I'm not sure I'd bring up honey and compare it to bee vomit.
   **Strongest:** Does it matter if Chou is the butterfly or if Chou is the person? All that matters is if Chou is happy. The quote says that Chou was happy as a butterfly but not whether or not Chou is happy as a person. What is clear, however, is that that moment where Chou was unsure of his reality had an impact on him in the present. Yes, sure, the butterfly effect could exist and Chou could be that butterfly but does it matter to Chou? At the end of the universe will it matter to the universe if Chou was the butterfly? Yes it matters to Chou and no it doesn't matter to the universe.
3. I think the determinist and many other pieces of work we've spoken about in the discussions keep missing one simple question. Does it matter to the people? Do people care if free will is truly an illusion? Right now, there is no proof that it is an illusion and most people believe they have free will. If you could know "everyone's psycholoogy, sociology, history, and biology" and could truly predict everyone's actions, what would you do with the knowledge? You tell everyone what they're going to do? Do you know the outcome? Maybe in some instances. But most people will want to see the outcomes for themselves and will do so anyways even if they already know what is going to happen. 
4.  
   1. I'm not sure what the question is here for 4a
   2. If an omniscient being exists, there is no reason humans cannot be free. Omniscient just means all-knowing. It does not mean controlling. It does not mean that the being is able to influence outcomes. Let's say I put two toys down in front of my dog. One is an RC car and the other is a chew toy with treats inside. I know the dog is going to choose the chew toy but the dog still has a decision to make. Surprise surprise, the dog chooses the chew toy. Just because you can predict something doesn't mean you have any control over it. Thus, just because you can predict that this is the end of my line of thinking for this topic doesn't mean an omniscient being can force it to be my last line of thinking.
   3. I think I've already said enough about why I think determinism is a bad argument. I agree with Sartre and think his argument is better and more compelling. Determinism is an easy way to take a passive role in your own life. "I didn't do that thing, I was forced to do it by determinism." Grow up and take responsibility for your actions. Even if it turns out that determinism is true, right now, in this moment, you look like a child blaming their imaginary friend.
5.  
   1. What I usually think of as my awake self has dreams that often help me confront or process something that's happening in my awake life. While I have had dreams within dreams, the reality in which I am writing this response is the highest level I ever reach. Thus, unless this is also a dream, then I can distinguish them. But does it matter if this is a dream? This is all I've ever known so this is my reality and my waking life.
   2. I feel like I'm stuck in a loop. Possibly even a jar. Does it matter if I'm a brain in a jar? I cannot give conclusive proof one way or another. But if all of us agree that it is real then who cares? If I was a brain in a jar I wouldn't be able to do anything about it because I'd be a brain in a jar. If I'm not a brain in a jar then good for me I'm now a brain in a meat and bone suit. At the end of the day, no matter which is true, I believe that I'm a brain in a meat and bone suit and I couldn't care less about the "truth".
6. Ahhh. Does it matter if time is real if we agree it is real? Lots of people like to sound smart and say "time is a social construct." Okay, sure. It's a social construct, but it's a real social construct. I don't know if time is real, but I've also agreed with other people that it is so it makes no difference to me. Thus, to me, the present is the most real. I now how I am now. I know that my memories can change and that the future hasn't happened yet and so, the only time that I can trust is now.
7. At this point I'm just getting frustrated. How many times can I write "does it matter if we all agree?" If the universe is five minutes old and we all think it's billions of years old, who cares? Everyone has accepted the "truth" that it is billions of years old. If everyone accepted that it was five minutes old, who cares? What impact would it truly have on our lives? Okay sure, I didn't exist five minutes ago but now I have responsibilities. I now have pets that need to be fed. I can't just say "oh they didn't exist five minutes ago so I don't need to feed them."
8. Searle's idea is flawed in just the way the last part of the question says. "How can Searle know for sure that there isn't a feeling, thinking being underneath all the wires and metal?" Thus, I think Searle would argue that Alicia is a weak AI and only has the ability to simulate a real woman. However, as I've said time and time again, it doesn't matter what we think. We have no stake in the matter and thus should fall back to the source. Corry believed that Alicia was real and Alicia did not want to die. Who am I to deny Corry his beliefs or Alicia her life? To the point about being nice to machines because one day they might have feelings, I often get mad when my Google products don't understand my voice commands and I yell at them and insult them because it is cathartic. My girlfriend, however, is always nice to them even if they don't understand because sometimes it responds in such a way that it is clear that it recognizes that it has just been insulted. Anyways, there's no way Searle could know the difference between a weak AI and strong AI and in the end it doesn't matter because if you cannot tell the difference, you should always assume it is a strong AI lest you accidentally harm a living, conscious being.

