1. Kessler defines philosophy as "*the rational attempt to formulate, understand, and answer fundamental questions.*" Given that definition, I think that anyone that thinks about a "fundamental question" is a philosopher. They may not consider themselves one, but I think they are in that moment. However, I do want to make clear the distinction between a professional philosopher and someone who philosophizes. Like I said in my first post, I was laboring under the impression that philosophy had to be intentional but I now think it can be unintentional such as someone who happens to be philosophizing and doesn't realize it.
2. From my understanding, the author of the New York Times article and Kessler are in agreement that while a degree in philosophy may not be directly applied in a career as a philosopher, it may be indirectly applied in other careers such as lawyers, educators, computer scientists, or some other such career which requires logic and reasoning skills in abundance. I think that both authors would be a bit disappointed in how right they are. In today's automated job application filtering, people are filtered out simply for not having a degree in *something* whether or not it is applicable to the job at hand. I remember a few years ago looking at jobs at Trader Joe's. The careers page listed a store manager position that required a bachelor's degree. Not necessarily in anything, just a degree for a position that can be well mastered by someone who has spent a decent chunk of time in the grocery or similar industries.
3. Finding the most compelling is a bit tricky for me because I don't find any of them particularly compelling at all. Of course, for the sake of this assignment, I must choose one and so I choose Book I. His argument is that if you are true to yourself, that is to say, faithful to your beliefs and honest with yourself, then you will garner the respect of others. I am going to set aside paragraph 1.6 because I do not believe in being respectful and polite to parents or elders simply because they are your parents or elders, and will instead focus on the rest. In the beginning he says that it feels good to learn and practice and to then delight in sharing those ideals with friends. Zeng states that every day he makes sure he has helped others and been honest and sincere. My last and favorite part that I'd like to highlight is where he says that when you make a mistake, you should be "courageous enough to acknowledge and correct it." I think the world could come a long way to being a more understanding place if more people were willing to admit when they made a mistake.
4. I take issue with Books XII and XV. "Don't do to others what you don't want done to you" is a very common saying and quite well intentioned but completely misses the point that it only works if other people are also following the same advice. People are frequently taken advantage of because they are well intentioned and believe that people on the other end are well intentioned as well. I'm much too much of a cynic to believe that these are good pieces of advice when given without warning or qualification.
5. I hate filial piety and I'm going to argue against it using the teachings I disliked in question four. Just because they are your parents does not mean that you must respect them or care for them or cover for them if they steal a sheep. Like I said before "Do not do unto others what you don't want done to yourself" goes both ways. If your parents would not cover for you stealing a sheep or would not care for you if you are sick, then there is no reason to do the same for them. In addition, nothing your parents do for you when you are under 18 (the current age of majority in Florida) counts towards this. You did not ask to be born and so it is their responsibility to make sure you are well preapred for life beyond 18. If, once you are 18 or older and decide to continue to steal sheep and they cover for you, only then should you do the same for them. If you are under 18, it is their duty to either teach you not to steal sheep or to cover for you because they are your parents and should have taught you not to steal sheep.
6. I support option 2 that God discovers morality or is controlled by moral rules. In Abrahamic religions in the beginning, there was only God. If there is only one being, then everything is good and everything is bad because there is nothing. You cannot say that murdering your brother is bad because you don't have a brother. You cannot say that giving food and shelter to the poor is good because you are the poorest person and the richest person because you are the only person. Then God created the earth and so on and eventually told Adam and Eve not to eat from the tree of knowledge. It is at this moment, that God has discovered morality. God does not want Adam and Eve to eat from this tree. It is God's tree and has every right to bar Adam and Eve from eating from it. The duo disrespect God and eat from it anyways. God is displeased and punishes them both. God did not dictate that eating from the tree was bad, just that the tree should not be eaten from. When it was just God, there was no morality. Morality was only discovered once the world began to form and there were multiple beings between which to decide what they agreed upon as right or wrong. Thus, morality is discovered.
   If I have made any mistakes in my re-telling, please correct me. It has been quite a while since I've read Genesis.
7.  
   - **A**: The man's argument was that without God, morality is just an opinion and that because most people share the opinion, it is not a fact. In this case, the man in the video would argue that God did not dictate how many sides are in a triangle because triangle is a word created by humans and thus a triangle can have however many sides someone wants them to. The man in the video would also argue that stabbing someone with a triangle isn't wrong because there is no God even though no one likes it when they get stabbed with a triangle because apparently consent doesn't matter. Frankly, I'd be embarrased if my name was at all attached to the video or argument because it's such a poor argument. Murdering me is wrong because I do not want to be murdered and do not consent to being murdered. Sure I could murder other people even though I believe it is wrong and do not want myself to be murdered. There's nothing stopping me or anyone else from being a hypocrite. 
   - **B**: I'm not sure what the angry interrupting man's argument is but Bob's argument seems to be that as human beings, we cannot form a complete theory about God because we are limited in our capacity and that what we deem to be logical and true may not be really true because we are limited in our capacity to observe. I think Bob would consider the person insisting that triangles have five sides and ask them what proof they have or what logical reason they have to believe it is so. I do not think that Bob would dismiss them for their beliefs, but would try to understand why this person believes triangles have five sides. I'm not convinced that this is a particularly solid argument either. I don't think it matters what's "really true" about triangles so long as most people agree that a triangle has three sides. After all, language is a human fabrication.
   - **C**: I have no idea what I just witnessed but I enjoyed it much more than the previous two videos. I think the argument is that if God is all-knowing, all-powerful, and in everything, then it would destroy a human to begin to understand. Granted, most of the video is just pretty lights and deranged screaming so I could be reading way too into this. This, to me, is the most compelling argument. There's no point in trying to figure out if God is real or not and if God is real how many sides a triangle should have so we may as well just enjoy the pretty lights and get some of our feelings out by screaming every once in a while.

